# UMS-Java
university management system using java programming's swing concept
•	UNIVERSITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM [UMS] deals with the maintenance of university, college, faculty, student information within the university. This project of UMS involved the automation of student information that can be implemented in different college managements.

•	The project deals with retrieval of information through an INTRANET based campus wide portal. It collects related information from all the departments of an organization and maintains files, which are used to generate reports in various forms to measure individual and overall performance of the students.
	
•	Integrated with Online Application workflow with unified data model. Monitoring and decision support system. Automation of all the Academic / Examination / Administration operations. Ease and accuracy of reporting.

This University Management System contains following:-
•	A login page where the specific admin can enter their username and password to directly access the main TAB.
•	The main window contains following Menu Items at the Menu Bar:-
1.	MASTER = In this Menu Item the admin can freely enter details of any new Student or faculty joining the University
In details tab a random Employee number is generated in order to specify each and every Faculty or Student.

2.	DETAILS = It contains all the information of Student as well as faculty given by the admin. The user can browse through all the information in a tabular form. 
It also contains an option to update or add a new Faculty or Student.
By clicking ADD or UPDATE button user enters MASTER menu automatically.
It also has a DELETE button which instantly removes the information of any specific Faculty or Student

3.	ATTENDANCE = It auto fetch the roll number of the Student and the user can mark attendance of them.

4.	ATTENDANCE DETAILS = User can view the attendance details of the Students and Faculty in a tabular form with date as well as time mentioned in it.

5.	EXAMINATION = The admin can enter the marks of any student subject wise. User can also view and update the marks of any specific Student.

6.	UPDATE DETAILS = User can update Student or Faculty details by simply putting the roll number of student or employee id of the Faculty.

7.	FEE DETAILS = User can see the fee structure of any course the University has and also he/she can also fill the Student fee form.

8.	UTILITY = User can browse through utility given by the system such as Notepad, Calculator or Web Browser.

9.	ABOUT = Contains the details of the University and contact information.


USERS ON INTERNET

Currently there are no users of this system on the Internet. But this system is freely available to anyone in the particular University and can be accessed by anyone having the specific ID’s for the system.


TOOLS & PLATFORMS

The following tools and software are used in this project:-
1.	NetBeans IDE :- This is the main IDE platform used for making this project.

2.	WampServer :- The main my sequel software used in order to view mysql database of this project and it also provides us with PHP servers. 
	
3.	Language Used :- Java Core

4.	Concept Used :- Swing

5.	DataBase Used :- MySQL

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
SOFTWARE REQUIREMENTS

Operating System                     :                  Windows XP/Above or Linux/Solaris
Client-side Scripting                 :                 JavaScript
Programming Language           :                 Java
Web Applications                     :                JDBC, JNDI, Servlets, JSP
IDE/Workbench                       :                 NetBeans IDE
Database                                   :                 MySQL
Server Deployment                  :                  WampServer

HARDWARE REQUIREMENTS

Processor                                  :                  Pentium IV or Above
Hard Disk                                 :                  40GB
RAM                                         :                  256MB minimum required

UNIVERSITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (UMS) deals with the maintenance of university, college, faculty, student information within the university. UMS is an automation system, which is used to store the college, faculty, student, courses and information of a college.
Starting from registration of a new student in the college, it maintains all the details regarding the attendance and marks of the students.
The admin first have to fill up the details of any new Student or Faculty joining the University.
Student details such as :-
1.	Name of the student.
2.	Father’s Name
3.	Age
4.	Date of birth in format = dd/mm/yyyy
5.	Residential Address
6.	Phone Number
7.	Email id
8.	Class X Percentage
9.	Class XII Percentage
10.	Aadhar Number
11.	Roll Number = It is randomly generated by the program
12.	Course provided by the University
13.	Branch

Teacher details such as :- 
1.	Name of the Faculty
2.	Father’s Name of the Faculty
3.	Age
4.	Date of Birth (dd/mm/yyyy)
5.	Residential address
6.	Phone Number
7.	Email ID
8.	Class X percentage
9.	Class XII percentage
10.	Aadhar number
11.	Educational Qualifications
12.	Department
13.	Employee ID = Which is generated randomly by the program

•	After adding those details the admin now can view the information of those in the Details Menu Item. He/she can also update those details as well just by simply clicking the update button.

•	Admin now can fill the attendance of students as well as the Faculty in Attendance Menu item and can modify it as well.

•	In Examination TAB the admin can enter the marks of the students subject wise. First he have to fill the subjects in one column and then enter the marks in another. User can also view and modify those as well.

•	User can view the fee structure and details in the Fee Details tab and can also fill up the Student Fee Form from there.

•	Utility tab provides the user to freely access the utility provided by the program such as Calculator, Notepad and Web Browser. 
There are some shortcut keys used as well such as:-
1.	Ctrl + o = It opens the New Faculty Tab in which user fills the details of new faculty joining the University
2.	Ctrl + m = It opens New Student admission tab
3.	Ctrl + b = It opens Faculty detail tab where user can see all information about those faculties
4.	Ctrl + p = It opens Student details tab
5.	Ctrl + R = It takes the user to the Update info tab where user can update information of both student as well as faculty
6.	Ctrl + c = Opens Notepad
7.	Ctrl + x = Opens Calculator
8.	Ctrl + w = Opens web browser
9.	Ctrl + z = Exits out from the window

LIMITATIONS OF THE SYSTEM

•	During the entrance of marks and attendance, if any mistake is done at a point, then this becomes cumulative and leads to adverse consequences
•	System doesn’t support different languages and different platforms.
•	Only user having the admin name and password can only access the system.
•	It doesn’t support full Online functionalities such as Google forms, excel sheets etc.

FUTURE SCOPE OF THE PROJECT

•	Improving Security issues of the System
•	Inserting Online supports such as Online classes(Connect the system directly with apps like Zoom, Google Classrooms etc.)
•	Conducting examinations on this system such as the admin can upload a test on the system in the Examination Tab and Student can login in order to take the test anytime.
•	User Validation using mail and password recovery
